# Configuring Splinter Daemon Logging

<!--
  Copyright 2018-2021 Cargill Incorporated
  Licensed under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License
  https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
-->

The default log configuration is sufficient for many applications but
sometimes a more targeted approach is needed. The logging system built into the
Splinter Daemon is highly user configurable and can separate the proverbial
wheat from the chaff. This document contains a high level description of how
logging works in the context of Splinter, examples of logging configurations,
and troubleshooting tips for common use cases.

## Prerequisites

* A working Splinter installation.
* Edit access to the `splinterd.toml` file for the above Splinter installation.

## High Level Logging Overview

There are two main abstractions built into our logging solution.

* Loggers
* Appenders

Loggers are the interface between Splinter code and appenders. Appenders are
the interface between Loggers and where logs are actually written.

There is a many to many relationship between the two concepts, each logger can
relate to any number of appenders and each appender can relate to any number of
loggers.

The life cycle of log flows as follows. Log statement is called in Splinter, the
message and associated metadata is directed to a logger. The logger forwards the
log to all of its configured appenders. Each of those appenders write the log to
their resource.

Besides their forwarding and writing duties loggers and appenders also filter
the logs they receive by level.

#### Log Levels

* Error
* Warn
* Info
* Debug
* Trace

Listed above in decreasing order of importance and volume. Each level includes
all the higher levels i.e. `Info` includes messages with levels `Warn`, `Error`,
and `Info`. 

## Loggers in Depth

Loggers form a tree structure. The root logger is the root of the logger tree
with all other loggers being its descendants. As such any log message that is
not directed to any other logger will be handled by the root logger.

Log messages are directed to loggers based on the loggers name and where the log
message originated. So log messages from the `splinter` package will match to
any loggers named `splinter`. Log messages match to the most specific
package/logger available so a message from `splinter::config` would match to a
logger named `splinter::config` if its available before matching to a `splinter`
logger.

Loggers have two other fields `appenders` and `level`. Appenders is an array of
appender names and serves as the connection between loggers and appenders. The
`level` field controls the filtering functionality of the logger as discussed
above.

For non-root loggers the `appenders` and `level` fields are optional. The level
will be set to the root logger's level. Appenders are a little more complicated,
each logger inherits its parents appenders. So if you had two loggers, `root`
and `splinter` and `root` has both `stdout` and `stderr` appenders configured.
Then the `splinter` logger would also have the same `stdout` and `stderr`
appenders plus any specifically called out in its configuration.

## Appenders in Depth

There are several types of appenders denoted by the `kind` field.

#### Appender Kinds
* stdout
* stderr
* file
* rolling_file

The `stdout` and `stderr` types log to stdout and stderr respectively as you
would expect. The `file` and `rolling_file` types both log to files and have
another required field `filename` that is the path to the desired log file. The
`rolling_file` type also has a required field `size` that controls when the file
is rolled up. When the log file reaches the size specified the file is deleted
and restarted. The files do not need to exist at Splinter startup but the
containing directory does.

## Example Configurations

### The default config

This is the configuration provided with all defaults written out.  Note that
while the stdout appender does not have a level specified by default it can be
filled in at runtime with one of `Info`, `Debug`, `Trace` for one, two or three
plus occurrences of the `-v` verbosity flag.

``` console
[appenders.stdout]
kind = "stdout"
encoder = "[{d(%Y-%m-%d %H:%M:%S%.3f)}] T[{T}] {l} [{M}] {m}\n"

[loggers.root]
appenders = ["stdout"]
level = "Trace"

[loggers.tokio]
appenders = ["stdout"]
level = "Warn"

[loggers.tokio_reactor]
appenders = ["stdout"]
level = "Warn"

[loggers.hyper]
appenders = ["stdout"]
level = "Warn"
```

### Redirect Splinter Daemon logs to file

This example will redirect the logs from libsplinter and the splinter daemon to
a single log file. This is the most generally useful configuration besides the
default configuration because it will seperate the logs related to splinters
functionality from the logs generated by underlying libraries.

``` console
[appenders.splinter_file]
kind = "file"
filename = "/var/log/splinter/splinterd.log"

[loggers.splinter]
appenders = ["splinter_file"]
level = "Info"

[loggers.splinterd]
appenders = ["splinter_file"]
level = "Info"

```

### Redirect Splinter Daemon logs to a Rolling File

This example is the same as the one above except the log file will be rolled
when it reaches a size of 50 megabytes.

``` console
[appenders.splinter_file]
kind = "rolling_file"
size = "50M"
filename = "/var/log/splinter/splinterd.log"

[loggers.splinter]
appenders = ["splinter_file"]
level = "Info"

[loggers.splinterd]
appenders = ["splinter_file"]
level = "Info"
```

### All Logs All the Time

This example has turned off all log filtering, every log statement will be
logged to stdout. This is not recommended and may cause performance issues.

``` console
[loggers.root]
appenders = ["stdout"]
level = "Trace"

[loggers.tokio]
level = "Trace"

[loggers.tokio_reactor]
level = "Trace"

[loggers.hyper]
level = "Trace"

```

## Procedure

1. Set up Appenders.

    a. Set appender name `[appenders.<appender_name_here>]`.

    b. Select appender kind to match your use case. `kind = "<appender_kind>"`

    c. Fill other required fields dependant on the appender kind. Filename is
    required for file and rolling_file kinds while size is only required for
    rolling_file appenders.

    d. Repeat steps a-c for any other appenders needed.

2. Set up Loggers.

   a. Set logger name `[loggers.<logger_name_here>]`, remembering that the name
   determines which Rust modules will write to this logger.

   b. Set appenders field to list of appender targets. `appenders =
   ["<appender_names_configured above>"]`

   c. Optionally set the Level field to filter the log messages forwarded to the
   appenders. `level = "Info"`

   d. Repeat steps a-c for each module that needs logging configuration.

3. (Optional) Override default loggers. Any logger named `root` will override
   the default included root logger.

``` console
[loggers.root]
appenders = ["splinter_file"]
level = "Info"
```

The above example will set the root logger to log all messages with level
`Info` and above to the `splinter_file` appender.

The `tokio`, `tokio_reactor`, and `hyper` loggers are included by default and
will log to the `stdout` appender. All of them can be overridden as shown in
the Example Configurations section above.

## Troubleshooting

Appender names have to exactly match between the logger appenders field and the
appender definition.

Setting up loggers to capture logs from sub modules requires that the names be
quoted. For example `[loggers."splinterd::config"]` to select for the
splinterd::config module.
